README.md, before:

<p align="center">
    <img src="assets/nvidia-cosmos-header.png" alt="NVIDIA Cosmos Header">
</p>

### [Main Repo](https://www.nvidia.com/cosmos/) | [Product Website](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/ai/cosmos/) | [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/collections/nvidia/cosmos-predict1-67c9d1b97678dbf7669c89a7) | [Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.03575) | [Paper Website](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/cosmos-predict1)

Cosmos-Predict1 is a key branch of Cosmos World Foundation Models (WFMs) specialized for future state prediction, often referred to as world models. It includes the following:

- **Diffusion-based world foundation models** for Text2World and Video2World generation, where a user can generate visual simulation based on text prompts and video prompts.
- **Autoregressive-based world foundation models** for Video2World generation, where a user can generate visual simulation based on video prompts and optional text prompts.
- **Image and video tokenizers** for tokenizing videos into continuous tokens (latent vectors) and discrete tokens (integers) efficiently and effectively.
- **Post-training scripts** for helping Physical AI builders post-train pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 for their applications.
- **Pre-training scripts** for helping Physical AI builders train their WFMs from scratch.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

## Example Usage

### Inference with pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 models
* [Inference with diffusion-based Text2World models](examples/inference_diffusion_text2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with diffusion-based Video2World models](examples/inference_diffusion_video2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with autoregressive-based base models](examples/inference_autoregressive_base.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with autoregressive-based Video2World models](examples/inference_autoregressive_video2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with tokenizer models](examples/inference_tokenizer.md)

### Post-train pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 models
* [Post-train diffusion-based Text2World models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_text2world.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Video2World models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_video2world.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Text2World models using custom multi-view datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_text2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Video2World models using custom multi-view datasets)](examples/post-training_diffusion_video2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train autoregressive-based base models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_autoregressive_base.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train tokenizers using custom datasets](examples/post-training_tokenizer.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**

### Inference with post-trained models:
* [Inference with post-trained multi-view diffusion-based Text2World models)](examples/inference_diffusion_text2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with post-trained multi-view diffusion-based Video2World models)](examples/inference_diffusion_video2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**


## Quick start
The code snippet below provides a gist of the inference usage.

```bash
PROMPT="A sleek, humanoid robot stands in a vast warehouse filled with neatly stacked cardboard boxes on industrial shelves. The robot's metallic body gleams under the bright, even lighting, highlighting its futuristic design and intricate joints. A glowing blue light emanates from its chest, adding a touch of advanced technology. The background is dominated by rows of boxes, suggesting a highly organized storage system. The floor is lined with wooden pallets, enhancing the industrial setting. The camera remains static, capturing the robot's poised stance amidst the orderly environment, with a shallow depth of field that keeps the focus on the robot while subtly blurring the background for a cinematic effect."

CUDA_HOME=$CONDA_PREFIX PYTHONPATH=$(pwd) python cosmos_predict1/diffusion/inference/text2world.py \
    --checkpoint_dir checkpoints \
    --diffusion_transformer_dir Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Text2World \
    --prompt "${PROMPT}" \
    --offload_prompt_upsampler \
    --video_save_name diffusion-text2world-7b
```

<video src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2ee7386b-8808-4db2-b38a-87ab679339f9">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>


<!-- ------------------------------ -->

## Cosmos-Predict1 Models

Cosmos-Predict1 include the following models

**Diffusion models**

* [Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Text2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Text2World): Text to visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Text2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Text2World): Text to visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation

**Autoregressive models**

* [Cosmos-Predict1-4B](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-4B): Future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-12B](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-12B): Future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-5B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-5B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-13B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-13B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation

**Tokenizers**

* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV8×8×8-720p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV8x8x8-720p): Continuous Video Tokenizer with 8x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with, 121 frames context
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV8×16×16-720p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV8x16x16-720p): Discrete Video Tokenizer with 8x16x16 spatio-temporal compression, and 49 frames context
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI8x8-360p): Continuous Image Tokenizer with 8x8 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI16x16-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI16x16-360p): Continuous Image Tokenizer with 16x16 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV4×8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV4x8x8-360p): Continuous Video Tokenizer with 4x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI8x8-360p): Discrete Image Tokenizer with 8x8 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI16x16-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI16x16-360p): Discrete Image Tokenizer with 16x16 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV4×8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV4x8x8-360p): Discrete Video Tokenizer with 4x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with low-resolution support

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

## License and Contact

This project will download and install additional third-party open source software projects. Review the license terms of these open source projects before use.

NVIDIA Cosmos source code is released under the [Apache 2 License](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

NVIDIA Cosmos models are released under the [NVIDIA Open Model License](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/agreements/enterprise-software/nvidia-open-model-license). For a custom license (such as exemption of guardrail), please contact [cosmos-license@nvidia.com](mailto:cosmos-license@nvidia.com).

Commit message:

Update README.md: Add example model behavior section and improve document structure

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
    <img src="assets/nvidia-cosmos-header.png" alt="NVIDIA Cosmos Header">
</p>

### [Main Repo](https://www.nvidia.com/cosmos/) | [Product Website](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/ai/cosmos/) | [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/collections/nvidia/cosmos-predict1-67c9d1b97678dbf7669c89a7) | [Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.03575) | [Paper Website](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/cosmos-predict1)

Cosmos-Predict1 is a key branch of Cosmos World Foundation Models (WFMs) specialized for future state prediction, often referred to as world models. It includes the following:

- **Diffusion-based world foundation models** for Text2World and Video2World generation, where a user can generate visual simulation based on text prompts and video prompts.
- **Autoregressive-based world foundation models** for Video2World generation, where a user can generate visual simulation based on video prompts and optional text prompts.
- **Image and video tokenizers** for tokenizing videos into continuous tokens (latent vectors) and discrete tokens (integers) efficiently and effectively.
- **Post-training scripts** for helping Physical AI builders post-train pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 for their applications.
- **Pre-training scripts** for helping Physical AI builders train their WFMs from scratch.

## Example Model Behavior

 [Cosmos-Predict Text2World](https://github.com/nvidia-cosmos/cosmos-predict1)

<video src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b001966c-5f5e-4927-a3fe-44d142dd0ab1"> Your browser does not support the video tag.</video>

[Cosmos-Predict Video2World](https://github.com/nvidia-cosmos/cosmos-predict1)

<video src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0bbba982-c6fd-4388-a46f-bf91ce4099ad"> Your browser does not support the video tag. </video>

## Getting Started

We provide a comphrehensive set of examples to illustrate how to perform inference, post-training, etc, with Cosmos-Predict1. Click a relevant example below and start your Cosmos journey.

### Inference with pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 models
* [Inference with diffusion-based Text2World models](examples/inference_diffusion_text2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with diffusion-based Video2World models](examples/inference_diffusion_video2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with autoregressive-based base models](examples/inference_autoregressive_base.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with autoregressive-based Video2World models](examples/inference_autoregressive_video2world.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with tokenizer models](examples/inference_tokenizer.md)

### Post-train pre-trained Cosmos-Predict1 models
* [Post-train diffusion-based Text2World models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_text2world.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Video2World models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_video2world.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Text2World models using custom multi-view datasets](examples/post-training_diffusion_text2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train diffusion-based Video2World models using custom multi-view datasets)](examples/post-training_diffusion_video2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train autoregressive-based base models using custom datasets](examples/post-training_autoregressive_base.md) **[with multi-node support]**
* [Post-train tokenizers using custom datasets](examples/post-training_tokenizer.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**

### Inference with post-trained models:
* [Inference with post-trained multi-view diffusion-based Text2World models)](examples/inference_diffusion_text2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**
* [Inference with post-trained multi-view diffusion-based Video2World models)](examples/inference_diffusion_video2world_multiview.md) **[with multi-GPU support]**


## Cosmos-Predict1 Models

Cosmos-Predict1 include the following models

**Diffusion models**

* [Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Text2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Text2World): Text to visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Text2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Text2World): Text to visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-7B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-14B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation

**Autoregressive models**

* [Cosmos-Predict1-4B](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-4B): Future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-12B](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-12B): Future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-5B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-5B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation
* [Cosmos-Predict1-13B-Video2World](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Predict1-13B-Video2World): Video + Text based future visual world generation

**Tokenizers**

* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV8×8×8-720p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV8x8x8-720p): Continuous Video Tokenizer with 8x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with, 121 frames context
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV8×16×16-720p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV8x16x16-720p): Discrete Video Tokenizer with 8x16x16 spatio-temporal compression, and 49 frames context
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI8x8-360p): Continuous Image Tokenizer with 8x8 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI16x16-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CI16x16-360p): Continuous Image Tokenizer with 16x16 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV4×8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-CV4x8x8-360p): Continuous Video Tokenizer with 4x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI8x8-360p): Discrete Image Tokenizer with 8x8 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI16x16-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DI16x16-360p): Discrete Image Tokenizer with 16x16 spatial compression with low-resolution support
* [Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV4×8×8-360p](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Cosmos-Tokenize1-DV4x8x8-360p): Discrete Video Tokenizer with 4x8x8 spatio-temporal compression with low-resolution support

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

## License and Contact

This project will download and install additional third-party open source software projects. Review the license terms of these open source projects before use.

NVIDIA Cosmos source code is released under the [Apache 2 License](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

NVIDIA Cosmos models are released under the [NVIDIA Open Model License](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/agreements/enterprise-software/nvidia-open-model-license). For a custom license (such as exemption of guardrail), please contact [cosmos-license@nvidia.com](mailto:cosmos-license@nvidia.com).
